so
git repositories and version control
with git solves really
um
frequent collaborative um failures uh i
have seen all three of them
um one
is
the stereotypical person that says yeah
i can't continue my work on the project
because my colleague is currently
working on this project as well and we
would conflict with each other
or a different
storyline i have such a good rephrasing
of this
of this piece of the discussion that the
reviewer wants us to change but it's
currently with my pi the word document
where i we're writing this manuscript
and he has had it for the past two weeks
and i really really want to rephrase the
discussion but i can't and then this has
also happened and it was really terrible
so there was a grand writing and
everyone
um adds the changes and comments to this
proposal of the grant and then here's
the scientific coordinator that you will
send a half
a dozen of drafts to and and the
coordinator will just scan all of these
documents and find all of the
convergences and much everything so
that's all a little bit of a
collaborative failure what most of us do
is we use tools such as the other pad or
stuff like google docs when we
collaborate on
things like manuscripts or grants with
several people and those collaborative
tools they allow real-time edits at the
um by by multiple persons
and
git is the original collaborative tool
um that
made this
possible
first
and um in order to
to approach this concept of
collaboration
i need to talk about something that
doesn't immediately have to do with
something with collaboration it is
called branching and it's a
purely git concept purely inside of
your git repository um
uh and i will just start
so here's a
git revision history it's a very typical
git revision history uh uh
something that's in your that happens in
daytime data sets um it uh
starts at the at the bottom and then the
most recent things are at the top so we
start by creating a data set and then we
add a preprocessing pipeline we tweak
the parameterization a bit we apply a
little bit of fixes to the
pre-processing pipeline we compute the
results and save them we publish this
thing and edit the ui so that it can be
cited
one way to view this revision history is
as a timeline of changes so you have
this linear time progression and on this
timeline every commit every save is this
one event in this timeline
git
develops these timelines on what is
called branches
and the default branch in data sets is
typically master or me so this is a
purely linear timeline here
that only develops on a single branch
and that is called master
however
beyond a master or a main branch
data sets and git repositories can have
unlimited branches and each of these
branches can have their own timeline and
these timelines can be related they can
be completely unrelated they can be
partially created
and
being able to work
with branches can really make you
bend in travel time
quite powerfully
if you run git status and get
repositories so just be um prepared the
stuff that i'm talking about here with
branches is purely get so you will see
me using purely get commands uh it's
something that that that datalet has no
way of of simplifying um so everything
everything here is with branches is is
purely good so if you run get starters
get starters will actually show you
which branch you're on and if you run
git branch then you will see all of the
branches
that exist every data set has a gdinix
branch that's a branch that you should
never visit it's
as unreadable as the commit hashes
basically that
that you um
that you've seen
but uh
i'm going to continue with the purely
kit
concept of branches
so
let's let me talk about a stereotypical
branching workflow
when you create a new data set it will
automatically create the default branch
to use the datalit create actually
creates this new dataset commit and that
is performed on your default branch and
there's a configuration in your git
config that
is responsible if that branch is called
master or if it's called main
every commit every day to let save then
progresses the timeline on the branch
that you're currently on and if you
never leave the master branch if you
don't touch branches at all then this
will all be
on the master branch
so something that is quite fun to look
back after a while is to see
you know the timelines that you've
created in your first version control
project
um here is a screenshot from the very
first version control project that i
used it was also my first time
programming
writing a python script and so forth
and also here the most recent stuff is
at the top the older one is the bottom
uh and what you can see here is that
it's quite messy
because and that
in in the past when i was working on
this i was just
purely desperate to make a thing work
and i tried everything i could so so i
changed the command
trying really hard to fix this relative
input error okay let's try input from
the future you can see with this red
cross
that everything
failed
none of the changes i did did anything
to fix my problem
i tried a path hack for relative import
i checked if i can maybe fix it if i
start from the root directory
um i did that wrong so i i repeated that
and then i found the typo that i made
and fixed a part so
sometimes the things that you try out
are not actually
really sure to be the things that fix
things in the end and sometimes um you
just need this handbooks to try stuff um
that
so that you can check and say if they
actually work before you you know create
this kind of um more confusing timeline
for others like this kind of timeline is
completely fine i often look at it just
to smile about myself but there are
there are use cases uh where you maybe
want to have a more pretty timeline and
branching is one way of
you know sandboxing developments before
you actually are sure that they work and
you integrate them into a timeline that
you want to share
um they're also useful
for transparency they're also useful for
structure the
definitely useful for collaborations
that will come tomorrow
and sometimes it's also fun to do a
little bit of branching
so let's say this preprocessing script
that i've added
that one i'm actually not sure if i can
get it to work it came from a previous
grad student and i just inherited it and
he used it but i have no idea and just
looking at it it looks really bad
it has all of these absolute paths that
i can't use the parametrization it looks
completely wrong to me so
what i'm doing is
i'm
trying to make this script a little bit
better and applicable to my use case so
i'm creating a new branch where i
sandbox these developments and structure
them so the by running it branch and a
name
i'm creating a new branch that is called
preproc
um and then i can change paths by
running the git checkout command to
change from the main branch to the
pre-prop branch
any
commit that i then make will be added to
the pre-prop branch and the main branch
will not know about this
command at all
i can
continue my development on this branch
in theory
i can tweak more parametrizations i can
finally make it work and then even
compute the results and then once i'm
happy with the developments that i've
made on that branch
i can decide
that
i actually want to integrate those
changes if i if i would want to not keep
them i could just remove the branch and
all of the changes associated with it i
can also just let it lie around i have
analysis scripts in which i test
different pre-processings in different
branches which is really neat because i
can very flexibly
change um two different processing
differently processed data in my
analysis
but let's say i'm happy with how this
branch has turned out i'm surprised that
everything worked so
i want to integrate this into the main
development
history that is the default branch
and what
you need to do in order to to do this
it's a little bit
uh i envision it always a little bit is
jumping around
uh switching timelines so i switch from
the pre-proc timeline back into the main
timeline which doesn't have any idea
about the
changes that have been done on the
preproc branch but i can integrate those
changes
by running what is called merging
so
by being on top of the main branch and
then merging pre-proc into the branch
and currently in
will um include all of the commits all
of this saves all of the changes that
i've made into the main revision history
and if i share the
the data set
they will show up on my main timeline
there are a couple of advantages it's
transparent it's really clean
if sandboxing fails then
my default branch is still like quite
nice
um yeah and keep i keep different
preprocessors in parallel and stuff like
that
um
what branches also allow is parallel
development so let's rewind a bit before
the merge and let's say
i realized that there's a problem that's
independent of the parametrization of
the script so i don't want to
add it to a branch where i've mostly
been tweaking the parametrization but
i've i've encountered this problem that
there's a path
um that that everything is absolute
paths instead of relative paths so it
will not run in my home directory
and um
in order to for example keep a really
clean timeline
uh i can create
a new branch that's based
on this last state of the main
default branch
by um again
using get
branch and get checkout or shorter it
check out dashb
and on this branch let's call it fixed
paths i'm adding the
fix for my past path issue
and it's on top of that path because
it's such an important thing i merge it
directly into the main line after i've
done it um using
the same jumping around merging
so jumping to the main branch merging my
fixed path
but now
i really want to have this crucial fix
also on top of this pre-prop branch
before i actually compute my results and
branches allow me to do this yeah time
bending a bit
um because
i
can merge any kind of branch and even
individual events from different
timelines to other timelines so if i
were to just have tweaks parameter here
and then i have a main timeline that
contains a fix for paths
i can decide to
merge the main branch
into my pre-processing branch to get my
pre-processing branch in line with the
developments that have happened
while i was working
on the different branch and that is one
way of getting this crucial fix into the
development history that i'm currently
building up
and then i can merge everything i can
you know publish my study i can
add more commits and they might even
just go to the main line because they
are you know nothing that i need to
sandbox it's just okay i'm going to add
the doi to my readme file or something
like that
that is
a little bit
too complex to
to be super keen on doing
um so you can see here's here's uh the
difference that this has made for my git
revision history the only advantage is
basically apart from the like
transparency is that it looks a little
bit more exciting right but in in
principle this whole branching it was um
it was a little bit complex the um true
strength of branching comes when we take
it uh into collaborative workflows i'm
going to go
through this quite quickly and i'm going
to throw around a little bit of keywords
that will only make sense um and
will be explained in more depth tomorrow
um but i hope to just um to just
register a little bit of the concepts
um
[Music]
so let's say
it's not only me that works on this
pre-processing script i also got the
grad student on board which had the
pre-processing script with me
so in order to collaborate i have my
local data set but i also create
you know
entry point for collaboration by
publishing it to github
so what i'm doing is i'm creating what
is called a sibling a remote location of
this data set
on github we'll do this tomorrow i can
use data that create sibling to do this
and then push everything that i have
done
to github and invite my collaborator for
example michael to come work with me on
that
i quickly um jump over this and go
through this tomorrow
um
what i then have is a sibling repository
on github and
but
um michael can do
is take this repository and clone it
from github to also have a development
copy in which he can make changes in
parallel it's like we've been sending
around this manuscript draft
and we can work on this manuscript draft
simultaneously
we now have three locations
one is my own sibling that's local on my
computer one is the entry point in
github one is the
clone of the data set that mikhail has
made in order to collaborate with me
my task is to make the pre-processing
script parametrization really need i
really want to change the
parametrization so i do all of the
preproc stuff um in
my preproc branch what mikhail notices
right when i was working on that is that
with the absolute paths
my this group would never work for me so
he creates in parallel to the work that
i'm doing a different branch the fixed
path branch that
contains a fix
to
this problem
because that branch still is so
important this this um
this change
he creates what is called a
pull request
and that results in him integrating his
fix
into this
um central repository for collaboration
onto the main branch so he has merged
his branch into the main
revision history
and then i can come along and because
it's github so it's quite neat he can
propose this change i can say hey oh
thanks for noticing this is really cool
great addition i'm going to merge this
and what i can then do is i can take
this change that has been happening
in parallel while i was working and
integrated into my own
work on the pre-processing script and
once i have done that i can
integrate the changes i have done on
this branch into the central repository
for collaboration
um
into the main revision and that
is was a little bit fast now but it is
the main idea between having several
people collaborate on repositories on
datasets they can work in parallel they
can independently propose the changes or
publish the changes that they want to do
and
integrate them
[Music]
in the central repository so that anyone
can update
or push their updates